11490 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based
Energy-Conscious Scheduling Under

Time-of-Use Electricity Price
Caixia Wang, Wenxuan Fang, Xin Dai , Renchu He , Wei Du , Senior Member, IEEE,

and Yang Tang , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— In the context of carbon peaking and carbon has increasingly become a focal point for both academia and
neutrality, green production scheduling that considers energy industry, especially with the growing emphasis on environmental
has attracted increasing attention. Reinforcement learning (RL) concerns and advancing industrialization. Time-of-use (TOU)
has emerged as a topic for developing efficient algorithms for electricity price policy is widely implemented to effectively
solving complex combinatorial optimization problems, such as balance electricity supply and demand. For business managers,
real-world shop scheduling problems. In this paper, we investigate appropriately responding to this policy by optimizing scheduling
the energy-conscious scheduling problem (ECSP) under time-of- tasks can significantly reduce energy costs. This paper addresses
use (TOU) electricity price with the goal of minimizing both a novel energy-conscious scheduling problem (ECSP) under
the waiting time and extra electricity cost. A mathematical TOU electricity price, specifically arising from the electrode
model is formulated, and an efficient deep RL (DRL)-based graphitization production process in graphite material man-
optimization method is proposed to solve the problem effectively. ufacturing. We propose a deep reinforcement learning-based
We design a novel ECSP network (ECSPNet) tailored to handle energy-saving scheduling optimization method, which integrates
various ECSP scales based on the characteristics of the problem. considerations for both production efficiency and energy cost
Moreover, the Tchebycheff decomposition method is used to indicators. By combining the unique characteristics of ECSP with
solve the multi-objective optimization problems, complemented the decision-making capabilities of reinforcement learning and
by the application of the policy gradient method from reinforce- the perception capabilities of deep learning, our method excels
ment learning to train the ECSPNet without size limitations. in solution speed, efficiency, and adaptability. The effectiveness
Experiments verify that the proposed ECSPNet outperforms and practical applicability of our method have been demonstrated
state-of-the-art methods and is computationally efficient, even through experiments on actual enterprise cases of various scales.
on instances of larger scales unseen in training. Real-world case The rapidly generated optimization scheduling plans can assist
studies reveal that the proposed method can reduce annual enterprises in rationally arranging scheduling tasks while min-
total electricity cost by approximately 30% while effectively imizing electricity cost. Looking ahead, our proposed method
maximizing production efficiency. has the potential to address a wide range of energy-conscious

scheduling problems under TOU electricity price policy.
Note to Practitioners—Enhancing energy consciousness along-

side improving production efficiency in manufacturing systems Index Terms— Deep reinforcement learning, energy-conscious
scheduling problem, time of use electricity price, optimization
algorithm.

Received 4 November 2024; revised 29 December 2024; accepted 24
January 2025. Date of publication 29 January 2025; date of current version
11 April 2025. This article was recommended for publication by Associate I. INTRODUCTION
Editor N. Frigerio and Editor X. Xie upon evaluation of the reviewers’
comments. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Sci- WITH the development of economic globalization and
ence Foundation of China under Grant 62293500, Grant U2441245, Grant the improvement of social productivity, energy is
62293502, and Grant 62173144; in part by Shanghai Rising-Star Program
under Grant 22QA1402400; in part by the Program of Introducing Talents evolving into an increasingly important resource for countries
of Discipline to Universities (the 111 Project) under Grant B17017; in part worldwide. Energy shortages pose a threat to the overall
by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant development of many nations. Manufacturing, which serves as
222202517006; and in part by the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Con-
trol Technology, China under Grant ICT2024A22. (Corresponding authors: the foundation of the economies in the majority of countries,
Wei Du; Yang Tang.) accounts for approximately half of the global energy consump-

Caixia Wang, Xin Dai, Wei Du, and Yang Tang are with the State Key tion [1], [2]. Therefore, it is of great practical significance to
Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology and the Key Laboratory of
Smart Manufacturing in Energy Chemical Process, Ministry of Education, carry out energy-conscious research from the perspective of
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, China, energy-saving and environmental protection, and then subse-
and also with Huzhou Institute of Industrial Control Technology, Huzhou quently reduce the energy consumption of industrial firms.
313099, China (e-mail: y15220005@mail.ecust.edu.cn; xindai@ecust.edu.cn;
duwei0203@gmail.com; tangtany@gmail.com). Electricity plays a crucial role as the primary energy source

Wenxuan Fang is with the Trustworthy and General Artificial Intelligence in the manufacturing industry. Time-of-use (TOU) electricity
Laboratory, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310000, China (e-mail: price policy [3] is the most prevalent power load control
fangwenxuan@westlake.edu.cn).

Renchu He is with the School of Department of Automation, College of strategy used by many power providers to effectively balance
Artificial Intelligence, China University of Petroleum, Beijing 102249, China electricity supply and demand, especially due to potential vari-
(e-mail: rche@cup.edu.cn). ations in customer electricity consumption within a day. This

This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2025.3536198, provided by the authors. policy strives to provide variable electricity rates that mirror

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TASE.2025.3536198 demand fluctuations, thereby meeting demand during peak
1558-3783 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence

and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



WANG et al.: DRL-BASED ENERGY-CONSCIOUS SCHEDULING UNDER TIME-OF-USE ELECTRICITY PRICE 11491

hours, enhancing the balance of electricity supply and demand, gathering and the search space. The ECSP poses a significant
and improving grid reliability. Meanwhile, it can incentivize challenge to traditional optimization methods.
manufacturers, particularly in sectors with high power usage, Table I summarizes recent research on energy-conscious
to strategically coordinate production processes to efficiently scheduling problems. Some studies focus exclusively on the
allocate power resources and lower total electricity cost (TEC). energy consumption of machines and jobs [14], [30]. Research

In recent years, the importance of TOU electricity price addressing TOU electricity price has considered factors such as
policy in optimizing production scheduling has grown sig- machine on/off states [13], energy consumption metrics [31],
nificantly due to its advantages [4], [5], [6], [7]. The basic not-all-machine options [32], energy-critical operations [33],
single-machine scheduling problem, when combined with and transportation and setup times [34] across various work-
TOU electricity price considerations, has been proven to shops. However, there is a notable scarcity of studies that
be NP-hard, posing significant challenges for finding solu- investigate time-varying energy consumption in operations
tions and highlighting its research importance [8], [9], [10]. influenced by production temperature, which subsequently
Research shows that mathematical programming methods are impacts electricity costs. Previous research has employed a
limited to addressing small-scale problems [11], [12]. Heuris- range of methodologies [3], [9], [10], [16]; yet, the poten-
tic methods are better suited for large-scale problems [13], tial of DRL [35], [36] in the context of TOU pricing for
[14]. However, it’s important to note that the quality of energy-related job scheduling remains underexplored [37],
the solution depends on the formulation of artificial rules. [38]. This gap highlights the challenge of addressing complex
Scheduling methods based on evolutionary algorithms outper- multi-objective optimization problems in practical produc-
form other methods in terms of solution quality quantity, and tion environments [39], [40]. Since the price of electricity
distribution [15], [16], [17]. However, they are time-consuming varies over different periods, considering electricity costs
when dealing with medium- and large-scale instances. There- in scheduling problems—while simultaneously incorporating
fore, it is necessary to explore new methods that can provide waiting time—presents a compelling challenge [11], [41].
faster solutions without compromising solution quality. This motivates the design of an efficient DRL-based opti-

Reinforcement learning (RL) has garnered significant mization method that facilitates information gathering through
attention recently due to its robust decision-making and opti- interactive exchanges with the environment. Our approach
mization capabilities [18], [19], [20], [21]. If we consider aims to effectively integrate this knowledge to make informed
a production scheduling problem as an RL environment, task decisions, ultimately achieving high-quality solutions that
the agent can learn policies or rules through well-designed balance cost and efficiency.
actions and states, along with substantial offline training Motivated by the above discussions, in this paper, we have
and interaction with the environment. RL has emerged as a investigated the ECSP under TOU electricity price using a
promising approach for enhancing the performance of schedul- DRL-based scheduling optimization method, with the objec-
ing algorithms, demonstrating notable success in modeling tive of minimizing both the total waiting time (TWT),
scheduling processes as markov decision processes (MDP) a measure of production efficiency, and extra electricity cost
[22], [23], [24], [25]. A key advantage of RL-based scheduling (EEC), an indicator of energy costs. A novel network called
algorithms is their ability to provide quick reaction times ECSPNet is proposed to solve the time-focused ECSP directly.
and robust generalization after training. Deep reinforcement ECSPNet incorporates electricity price features into the model
learning (DRL), a specialized subset of RL, further amplifies using the attention mechanism, departing from the com-
these strengths by utilizing deep neural networks to manage mon encoder-decoder structure. This integration enhances the
high-dimensional state and action spaces. Through iterative model’s generalizability and efficiency in solving large-scale
interaction with dynamic, time-varying environments, DRL ECSP instances. By combining adaptability and computational
excels at modeling complex decision-making processes and efficiency, DRL offers significant advantages over traditional
identifying optimal actions to maximize rewards [26], [27], optimization methods, particularly in terms of accuracy and
[28], [29]. scalability in complex scenarios. In this work, ECSPNet

However, much of the existing DRL literature on schedul- leverages the robust decision-making capabilities of DRL
ing problems remains overly simplified, often focusing on to effectively integrate problem-specific features, enabling
problems with well-defined topological structures, while dynamic, time-series task decisions. This integration enhances
overlooking real-world constraints. Furthermore, few DRL the optimization strategy and facilitates the rapid acquisition
algorithms, particularly policy-based ones, are capable of of end-to-end solutions tailored to ECSP.
effectively searching for optimal policies and generating end- The contributions of this paper can be summarized as
to-end schedules when confronted with complex practical follows:
optimization challenges. One of the more complex combinato- 1) To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to
rial optimization problems is the energy-conscious scheduling propose a mathematical model for the ECSP under TOU
problem (ECSP) [30], which is influenced by TOU elec- electricity price, aimed at optimizing both waiting time
tricity price. All operations in the ECSP related to high- and electricity cost concurrently.
and low-energy consumption areas are completed sequentially 2) A novel DRL-based approach is developed. By incor-
under TOU electricity price. The process primarily focuses porating the characteristics of ECSP and using the
on time-based decision-making without explicit topological attention mechanism, we establish ECSPNet, an end-to-
information, thereby increasing the complexity of information end framework that is not constrained by problem size,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



11492 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

TABLE I
EXISTING RESEARCH ON SOLVING ENERGY-CONSCIOUS SCHEDULING PROBLEMS

overcoming the problem of poor generalization ability. job consisting of fixed procedures divided into three stages
We utilize the Tchebycheff decomposition method to based on varying energy consumption levels due to production
simultaneously optimize conflicting objectives. DRL- temperature. These stages include a low-energy consumption
based approach enables ECSPNet to exhibit powerful phase, a high-energy consumption phase, and a return to
search capabilities in the solution space. low-energy consumption, where the high-energy consumption

3) Extensive experiments conducted on various real-world stage significantly contributes to the overall production cost.
case studies demonstrate the superior performance and The processing time for each step is predetermined, meaning
computational efficiency of ECSPNet across all problem that once a job begins, it must complete all steps continuously
scales. After minimal training, ECSPNet consistently within the specified time frame.
outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms by delivering sta- In addition to the traditional objective of minimizing
ble, high-quality solutions that minimize total electricity completion time in common shop scheduling problems, the
cost while maximizing production efficiency. ECSP introduces a novel element by incorporating electric-

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. ity costs. This integration considers two key factors: power
Section II provides the problem description and formulation. consumption [1] and TOU electricity price [11]. Specifically,
Section III proposes the details of ECSPNet for solving the the operational process necessitates electricity usage, which
ECSP, including its framework, model training, and enhance- involves constantly fluctuating energy consumption. Through-
ment strategies. Section IV reports the experimental results out each job’s entire process, power consumption is dictated by
and provides a comparative analysis. Finally, conclusions are its unique power curve. Different types of jobs exhibit distinct
drawn in Section V. power curves, generally exhibiting fluctuations, often with

sudden power spikes during certain phases of the electrical
II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION AND FORMULATION process, representing high-power states. Additionally, TOU

A. Problem Description electricity price varies based on daily timeframes, leading
The ECSP is defined as follows. A set of independent jobs is to fluctuations in unit-time electricity tariffs, with peaks and

sequentially arranged on a machine in the workshop, with each troughs during different periods.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



WANG et al.: DRL-BASED ENERGY-CONSCIOUS SCHEDULING UNDER TIME-OF-USE ELECTRICITY PRICE 11493

Fig. 1. Processing procedure of jobs.

Based on the aforementioned electrical properties of jobs, Indices and sets:
it proves advantageous to incorporate brief power interrup- i Index of jobs, i ∈ {1, . . . , I }.
tions, with a duration during the electrical process in the j Index of steps of each job, j ∈ {1, . . . , J }.
actual production of the enterprise, and the cooling and power t Index of time slots, t ∈ {1, . . . , T }.
consumption impact is negligible. Fig. 1 offers an overview
of the comprehensive working process within the workshop, Parameters
spanning from semi-finished to finished products. This depic- E Pt Electricity price in time slot t .
tion encompasses the influence of job energy consumption H L Price Numerical bounds to distinguish between high
and TOU electricity price. The ECSP aims to determine the and low electricity prices.
optimal processing sequence of jobs and execution methods for H Poweri The high power consumption of job i .
each job, considering whether the high-energy consumption M A large enough positive integer.
step of job should wait. Using the three-field notation [42], the pi, j The processing time of step j of job i .
ECSP can be represented by 1|TOU, PI|{TWT, EEC}, where T L Length of each time slot.
‘1’ indicates a single machine, ‘TOU’ refers to the time-of-use T PW The maximum time of all jobs to temporarily
electricity price, ‘PI’ signifies the brief power interruptions, interrupt power supply.
‘TWT’ represents the total waiting time, and ‘EEC’ denotes
the total extra electricity cost. Continuous variables

There are several assumptions and constraints within the EEC The total extra electricity cost of jobs.
operation. TWT The total waiting time of jobs.

1) Each job is independent and can start processing at time ECi The extra electricity cost of job i .
zero. P I Ti Starting time of power interruption of job i .

2) The workshop accommodates only one job at a time. P RTi Ending time of power interruption of job i .
3) Each job requires processing in the workshop once and P STi Starting time of power supply of job i .

only once. PT stepi, j Starting time of power supply of step j of job
4) All jobs follow identical processing procedures. i .
5) Upon entering the workshop, each job must complete all W Ti The waiting time of job i .

procedures. Binary variables
6) Except for recording the interruption time, any negligi-

ble impact of short interruptions on power consumption P Ht =1 if time slot t is a high price zone, 0 other-
during the job’s processing is disregarded. wise.

P HCi,t =1 if the high power consumption step of job
i is processing in time slot t , 0 otherwise.

B. Problem Formulation P Ii,t =1 if job i starts to interrupt power supply in
In this section, we present the mathematical model for the time slot t , 0 otherwise.

ECSP. First, we summarize the relevant parameters and define P Ri,t =1 if job i starts to reinstate power supply in
the decision variables used in the formulation. time slot t , 0 otherwise.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



11494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

∑
P Si,t =1 if job i starts to energize in time slot t ,

∑ Pstepi, j,t ≤ 1,∀t, (26)
0 otherwise. i∈I j∈J

Pstepi, j,t =1 if step j of job i is processing in time slot
t , 0 otherwise. Pstepi, j,t = pi, j ,∀i, j, (27)

PWi,t =1 if job i is waiting in time slot t , 0 otherwise. t∈T

P HCi,t = Pstepi,2,∑t ,∀i, t, ∑ (28)
Based on the above notations, the mixed integer linear P STi = P STi−1 + pi−1, j + PWi−1,t ,∀i, (29)

programming (MILP) model of the ECSP is formulated as j∈J t∈T
follows: ∑ PT stepi,1 = P STi ,∀i, (30)

n PT stepi,2 = PT stepi,1 + pi,1 +W Ti ,∀i, (31)
min TWT = W Ti ,∀i, (1)

∑ PT step
i i,3 = PT stepi,2 + pi,2,∀i, (32)
=1
n where Eqs. (3)-(4) minimize the cumulative waiting time and

min EEC = ECi ,∀i, (2) the additional electricity cost incurred by jobs in the workshop.
i=1 Eqs. (5)-(7) define the starting times for energizing, power

s.t. W Ti =∑P RTi − P I Ti ,∀i, (3) interruption, reinstatement, and the starting time of the step
ECi = (E Pt × H Poweri × P Ht × P HCi,t (4) in each job, respectively. Eqs. (8)-(11) constrain the starting

t∈T time of the step in each job. Eqs. (12) ensures that each
× (1−∑PWi job starts only once. Eqs. (13)-(15) constrain the power to

,t )),∀i,
be interrupted at most once. Eqs. (16)-(17) guarantee the

P STi = T L ×∑ t × P Si,t ,∀i, (5) relationship between the interrupting time and the starting time
t∈T of each job. Eqs. (18)-(23) define the continuity of the power

P I Ti = T L × ∑t × P Ii,t ,∀i, (6) interrupt waiting stage, and constrain the maximum duration
t∈T of power interruption. Eqs. (24)-(25) define the high and low

P RTi = T L × t∑× P Ri,t ,∀i, (7) electricity price zones. Eqs. (26)-(27) constrain the processing
t∈T time of each job. Eq. (28) defines the relationship between

P steps and the high power consumption of jobs. Eq. (29) ensures

∑T stepi, j = T L × t × Pstepi, j,t ,∀i, j, (8)
t∈T that jobs are processed sequentially. Eqs. (30)-(32) ensure that

the steps of each job are processed in the prescribed sequence,
Pstepi, j,t ′ ≥ Pstepi, j,t ,∀i, j, t, (9) and define the time order for each step of jobs.

t ′∈t Thus, the MILP formulation of ECSP can be described
PT stepi, j ≥ T L × t × Pstepi, j,t ,∀i, j, t, (10) by minimizing the objective functions (1)-(2) simultaneously,
PT stepi, j ≤ T L × t + M × 1− Pstepi, j,t ,∀i, j, t,

∑ subject to constraints (3)-(32). In practical calculations, con-
(11) sidering multiplying (2) by 2 serves to narrow the range and

maintain both objective functions on a similar scale. Given the

∑ P Si,t = 1,∀i, (12)
t∈T complexity of the single-machine scheduling problem under

TOU electricity price, which is known to be strongly NP-

∑ P Ii,t ≤ 1,∀i, (13)
hard [8], [43], and considering the advantages of DRL in

t∈T
sequential decision-making scheduling problems, we propose

∑ P Ri,t ≤ 1,∀i, (14) a DRL-based algorithm in the following section to optimize
t∈T ∑ the ECSP.

P Ii,t = P Ri,t ,∀i, (15) In the actual manufacturing enterprise related to the ECSP,
t∈T t∈T ∑ the electrode graphitization production process for graphite
P I Ti ≤ P STi + pi,1 + M × (1−∑ P Ii,t ),∀i, (16) material manufacturing involves a furnace and n electrode

t∈T materials that require sequencing. The production process of
P I T each electrode material is influenced by temperature effects,

i ≥∑P STi + pi,1−M × (1− P Ii,t ),∀i, (17)
resulting in significant variations in energy consumption. This

t∈T
process can be divided into three stages: the front and rear

T L × PWi,t = P RTi − P I Ti ,∀i, (18) stages represent low-power consumption phases, while the
t∈T middle stage constitutes a high-power consumption phase.

P RTi − P I Ti ≤ T PW + 1,∀i, (19) Table II provides an example with 5 jobs and 3 steps, giving
P RTi − P I Ti ≥ 0,∀i, (20) the specific processing time for each step.
PWi,t ≥ P Ii,t ,∀i, t, (21)

III. DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING BASED
PWi,t ≤ 1− P Ri,t ,∀i, t, (22) OPTIMIZATION SCHEDULING FOR ECSP
PWi,t+1 ≥ PWi,t − P Ri,t+1,∀i, t, (23) This section introduces the proposed method in detail.
M × P Ht ≥ E Pt − H L Price,∀t, (24) In this article, solving the ECSP is considered a sequential
− M × P Ht ≤ E Pt − H L Price,∀t, (25) decision-making process. It iteratively conducts scheduling

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



WANG et al.: DRL-BASED ENERGY-CONSCIOUS SCHEDULING UNDER TIME-OF-USE ELECTRICITY PRICE 11495

TABLE II
AN EXAMPLE OF ECSP WITH 5 JOBS AND 3 STEPS

WITH THE PROCESSING TIME

operations to allocate n jobs (i.e., tasks to be scheduled) to
each period, taking into account the electricity price. The
process continues until all tasks are scheduled. Additionally,
it integrates the different energy consumption of these opera-
tions to determine if a brief power outage (wait) is necessary
for the current task to avoid areas with high electricity prices Fig. 2. The model architecture of ECSPNet.

while taking into account the dual goals of waiting time and
electricity cost. In this work, we design a specific-designed accuracy in task selection compared to using a single
network ECSPNet without limitation of problem sizes for solv- block. While there may be a potential reduction in speed,
ing the ECSP. Firstly, the model, centered around the attention the collaboration between the two blocks achieves an
mechanism, conscientiously considers the characteristics of optimal balance between accuracy and efficiency.
ECSP, allowing tasks to compete with each other and striving 3) Post-processing: A linear operation is applied to the
to achieve a balance between accuracy and speed. It stream- output, transforming the output of each task into a two-
lines the multi-objective problem into a singular objective dimensional array, denoted as (n, 2). After performing
during the training phase using the Tchebycheff decomposition softmax, the output can be converted into probabilities
method in order to obtain a more comprehensive Pareto front. Probs, which represent the two options for each task:
Additionally, it employs the policy gradient method to train whether to wait or not.
the network parameters, and introduces the consideration of Fundamentally, ECSPNet’s primary role involves construct-
problem difficulty to solve the difficulty of problem size ing a functional mapping from the task parameters to the
limitation. Finally, the parameters of ECSPNet are optimized subsequent operations to be executed.
to obtain a better solution.

B. MDP Formulation of ECSP
A. Model of ECSPNet The scheduling process of the ECSP is formulated as a MDP

In this work, the model of ECSPNet is built based on the to address the optimization problem in task scheduling through
characteristics of ECSP, which is suitable for TOU electricity a task selection and state transition model, which is a critical
price and energy-conscious problems. In particular, it operates step for applications of DRL-based algorithms. The relevant
with the attention mechanism [44] at its core and adopts a definitions are outlined as follows.
structure different from the encoder-decoder [21], [45]. The 1) State: The state refers to the description of the environ-
architecture of the model is shown in Fig. 2. The main steps ment at a specific moment, encompassing all necessary
are as follows: information about the current system. Here, the state

1) Pre-processing: This involves embedding multiple sets comprises three related parameters: the current electric-
of job instances, encompassing all tasks T asks and ity price E P , the current target value Objs, including
electricity price E P . Given the multi-objective nature TWT and EEC, and the current sequence of tasks
of the problem, it necessitates embedding the current T asks, which is the set of job i to be completed,
target value Objs and weight w, integrating them into forming a complex multidimensional state space. These
the tasks after embedding. parameters are mapped to a unified dimensional space,

2) Core functionality within the ECSPNet Block: This ensuring that different types of information can be
block serves as the central model component. The first is processed within the same feature space. The state
the attention mechanism of the current electricity price incorporates the status of current task execution and
E P to T asks, intending to obtain the tendency of the the influence of the external environment on these
E P in selecting a specific E P ′. Then, E P is added tasks, enabling the model to consider multiple factors
to the T ask to get T ask ′. After that, the self-attention in decision-making. Furthermore, each state influences
mechanism is used on the T ask and allows tasks to the subsequent decision-making process. It is worth
compete with each other to determine the probability of emphasizing that as scheduling progresses, T asks is
choosing tasks. The model comprises two serially con- continuously updated, and the state space gradually
nected blocks, which significantly improve the model’s reduces until it eventually becomes empty, signifying

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



11496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

that all tasks have been scheduled. This characteristic
makes this representation computationally attractive for
real-time and large-scale applications.

2) Action: Actions are selected based on the probability
distribution Probs derived from the model output.

Probs = [PWi ]n×2 (33)

where PWi = 0 indicates that task i will be executed
next without waiting, while PWi = 1 indicates that
task i will be delayed (wait) before execution. At each
decision point, the model not only chooses the next task
but also determines whether to execute it immediately
or delay its execution, allowing for flexible decision-
making. The action selection employs a probabilistic Fig. 3. The results of ECSPNet Tchebycheff and ECSPNet Weightsum.

sampling approach, introducing a degree of random-
ness into the decision-making process, and allowing the
model to explore different task execution orders during D. Design of Policy Gradient
training and inference. The purpose of this design is It is challenging to obtain the optimal solution for large-
to balance exploration and exploitation in scheduling sized ECSP. Therefore, relying on supervised learning to train
decisions, preventing the model from merely choosing the ECSPNet becomes impractical. Fortunately, DRL offers
the current optimal solution and falling into local optima. the capability for the policy agent to explore the decision space

3) State Transition: State transitions are based on the cur- and autonomously discover superior strategies.
rently selected task and the state, which updates the We apply the policy gradient method to optimize the net-
electricity price E P and the objective function Objs. work parameters. The goal of the gradient ascent method is
Notably, it depends on the current action, meaning that to maximize the reward function extensively. Additionally,
the selection and execution of the current task determine we introduce cross-entropy, setting as 0.1. This approach
the changes in both the electricity price and the objective helps avoid extreme probability situations, offering several
function, which define the next state. At each decision advantages: 1) obtaining diversified solutions through random
step, the state is updated based on the previous state and sampling, and 2) preventing the appearance of negative infinity
the corresponding action. in log pθ (π |s), thus ensuring algorithm stability. The gradient,

after the inclusion of cross-entropy, is expressed as follows:

C. Design of Reward Function
θ ← θ +∇θ J (θ |s)

As the ECSP involves considering both TWT and EEC as
∇

part of a multi-objective problem, the training process of DRL θ J (θ |s) = Eπ∼p(·|S)[(R(π |s)− b(s))∇θ log pθ (π |s)]

necessitates a clear target value. To facilitate this, the ECSP is − α · Eπ∼p(·|S) log pθ (π |s) (35)
transformed into a single-objective problem. The Tchebycheff
decomposition method is utilized to derive the target value where b(s) is a baseline function that is independent of
R(π). Compared to the direct weighted addition method, π . The purpose is to normalize the reward function around
this decomposition technique offers a significant advantage 0 and estimate the maximum completion time of problem s.
by avoiding the limitation of direct weighted addition, which This normalization helps reduce the variance of the gradient,
can only capture a subset of the Pareto front, particularly ensuring more stability and facilitating efficient training.
in cases where the Pareto front is concave. In this scenario, It is worth noting that b(s) in (36) does not employ the
we uniformly distribute the variable w within the range of neural network learning method used in Actor-Critic. Training
0.01 to 0.99. two networks simultaneously can easily lead to training insta-

bility. Instead, b(s) in this context represents the average value
R(π) = −max[w · TWT, (1− w) · EEC]. (34) within the same batch. Due to varying difficulty levels among

questions, b(s) cannot be simply denoted by the mean value.
Fig. 3 illustrates the comparison among different methods: The problem’s difficulty is determined by the cumulative high

the dotted line represents the selected weight, the blue dots power consumption times of all tasks Tpt , and ratio R(π |s)
= T ,

pt
correspond to solutions obtained via the Tchebycheff decom- which signifies the relationship between the current reward
position method, and the orange dots represent the solutions function and its difficulty. We assume that the ratio should
obtained using the linear weighted decomposition method. remain consistent across different problems. Thus, we define
Notably, the results from the Tchebycheff decomposition ratio 1 ∑

= B batch ratioi , and b(s) = ratio × Tpt . However,
method align more consistently with the assumptions and in the context of ECSP, a multi-objective problem, different
yield a more comprehensive Pareto front, compensating for values of w can alter the problem’s difficulty. Therefore,
the limitations of the latter method. solving ratio is conducted only within the set Ai with similar

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



WANG et al.: DRL-BASED ENERGY-CONSCIOUS SCHEDULING UNDER TIME-OF-USE ELECTRICITY PRICE 11497

w values. Finally, b(si ) is expressed as follows: Algorithm 2 Running of ECSPNet

T i Input: s – the data of the ECSP problem
b pt ∑ R(π j

|s j )
(si ) =

|Ai | A T j . (36) B – batch size
i pt β – randomness

1: w i
i ← B+1 , i = 1, 2, . . . , B

E. Training of ECSPNet 2: Pθ (·|si , wi )← R∑eLU[pθ (·|si )− β ·maxπ (pθ (π |si ))]
The training process of ECSPNet can be summarized as 3: p′θ (·|s

P
i , wi )←

θ (·|si ,wi )

π Pθ (π |si ,wi )

follows. The inputs for training primarily consist of the given 4: π i
← sample from p′θ (·|si , wi ), i = 1, 2, . . . , B

distribution S of the training data, the batch size, and the 5: Calculate TWT and EEC
scale of cross-entropy. First, we initialize the parameters θ of 6: Obtain non-dominated solutions P
ECSPNet. For each batch, we first conduct random sampling 7: return P
from the input data to obtain the distribution si , weight wi ,
and processing sequence πi respectively. Next, we assess TWT
and EEC and calculate R(π) according to (34) to establish the IV. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
reward function for a single target. Then we calculate the base- A. Case Introduction
line b(si ) according to (36). Finally, the Adam optimization
algorithm is utilized using the policy gradient function (35) To empirically evaluate the performance of the proposed
to train the model for optimization purposes. This process ECSPNet, a series of experiments were conducted based on
continues iteratively until the stopping condition is met. The historical production data from a real carbon material factory
training procedure of ECSPNet is outlined in Algorithm 1. in mainland China. The experimental parameters primarily

involve n jobs with three energy-related steps in each job.
Algorithm 1 Training of ECSPNet Considering the actual electricity price conditions, four inter-

Input: vals of high and low electricity price were considered each
S – the given distribution S of training data day, with durations of 0.6, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.4 time units,
B – batch size where one-time unit represents the actual 10 hours. Reflecting
α – the scale of cross-entropy diverse production scenarios, the energy consumption times

1: Initialize ECSPNet params θ for the three steps in each job were randomly assigned with a
2: while stopping criterion is not met do precision of 0.1 within the range of [0.4, 0.8], [0.2, 0.6], and
3: si ← sample from S, i = 1, 2, . . . , B [0.4, 0.8] respectively. The high energy consumption of jobs
4: wi ← sample from 0.01 to 0.99, i = 1, 2, . . . , B is all set to 1, and the maximum allowable power outage was
5: π i

← sample from pθ (·|si , wi ), i = 1, 2, . . . , B limited to four hours. Additionally, to address ECSP instances
6: Calculate T

T i ∑WT and EEC of varying scales, the number of jobs was set to 20, 40, 60,
7: R(π i

|si , wi ) = −max[wi · TWT, (1− wi ) · EEC] and 100. Considering job durations and potential outages, the
pt R(π j

8: b(s |si ,wi )
i ) = |Ai | Ai T j scheduling period for the largest scale could extend up to

pt
9: ∇θ J (θ)← 110 days. During the experimental process, both the training

10: 1 ∑B i
− B i [R(π s )− b

=1 | i (si )]∇θ log pθ (π |s) set and the test set were randomly generated based on the
11: 1 ∑B

+ aforementioned parameters, covering ECSP instances across
B i αE

=1 π∼p(·|si )∇θ log pθ (π |si )
12: θ ← Adam(θ,∇θ J (θ)) various scales. For broader experimentation and more robust
13: end while comparisons, three cases were randomly generated at each
14: return a well-trained ECSPNet scale for the following experiments.

B. Experimental Settings
F. Running of ECSPNet Extensive experiments are conducted on the ECSPNet to

To generate a comprehensive Pareto front throughout the verify its efficiency and effectiveness. We compare ECSPNet
inference process, it becomes necessary to employ ECSPNet in with NSGA-II [46], GMOEA [47], and MOEA/D-DQN [48].
producing numerous solutions in batches with varied weights. NSGA-II is selected as the most widely used multi-objective
Simultaneously, we consider a certain random capacity to optimization algorithm (MOEA) in the field. GMOEA is
modify the probability instead of directly using the maximum chosen as the MOEA that incorporates deep learning meth-
probability. ods into its optimization process and MOEA/D-DQN is an

∑P efficient MOEA that uses the DRL-based method to select
θ (·|si , wi )p′θ (·|si , wi )← (37) the best operators. In addition to using MOEAs as compared

π Pθ (π |si , wi ) algorithms, we also designed the Greedy algorithm based
wherePθ (·|si , wi ) = ReLU[pθ (·|si ) − β · maxπ (pθ (π |si ))]. on the following principles, 1) prioritize actions that would
Subsequently, random sampling occurs within the modified not increase the weighted objective value, and 2) select the
probability to generate a solution. Within this process, the action with the highest power consumption time of its task
value of β ranges between [0, 1), where a smaller value among them. The Greedy algorithm serves as a benchmark to
indicates greater unpredictability in the prediction. The specific demonstrate the practical value of the approach proposed in
reasoning behind this process is detailed in Algorithm 2. this paper. The Greedy algorithm and the proposed method,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



11498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

ECSPNet, are based on a similar task selection structure and Given a solution set P , the HV value of P is defined as
objective weighting approach to find the optimal task selection the area covered by P concerning a predefined reference
strategy. Additionally, the ϵ-constraint (EC) method [7] and point in the objective space.
the direct weighting (DW) method from the class of exact ⋃

H V p∈P hv(p, r)
approaches are employed, which provides a more comprehen- (P, r) = (38)
sive comparison of the proposed method. Using the CPLEX hvO

24.1.3 with the solvers default parameters, the solution process where hv(p, r) represents the hypervolume enclosed
terminates when the error of the global optimal solution is between point p and the reference point r, while hvO
less than 1% or the time limit of 2000s is exceeded. NSGA-II represents the hypervolume enclosed between the origin
is implemented in Geatpy [49] using Python 3.10.9 without and the reference point. A higher HV value implies supe-
modification, and the settings of GMOEA and MOEAD- rior algorithm performance. For this evaluation, we set
DQN refer to the official implementation [47], [48]. ECSPNet the reference point as (0.3× n, 0.3× n), where n is the
is implemented in Pytorch 1.13 using Python 3.10.9. All number of jobs.
algorithms are executed on a PC equipped with an Intel Core 2) C-metric [52]: It evaluates the convergence and distribu-
i9-10900K 3.7-GHz processor, 64 GB of RAM, and an Nvidia tion of the algorithm by comparing the results of the two
GeForce RTX 4090 GPU. algorithms. Let A and B represent two approximations to

The training parameters are calibrated as follows. We set the Pareto front of a multi-objective problem, C(A, B) is
the epoch number to 3000 and the batch size to 2048. For defined as the percentage of the solutions in B that are
the learning rate, the initial learning rate is 10−3, and using dominated by at least one solution in A. If C(A, B) is
the multi-step learning rate scheduler, the learning rate is greater than C(B, A), it means that A is closer to the real
divided by 10 when the epoch is 1000 and 2000. More- Pareto front and more convergent than B.
over, the data set size is 50 × 2048, and a new data set

|{b ∈ B|∃a ∈ A : a ≻ b}|
will be randomly generated for each epoch. Once the loss C(A, B) = (39)
function stabilizes without further changes, we consider the |B|
training complete, and the training phase typically requires Note that C(A, B) does not necessarily equal 1 −
approximately three hours. In addition, it is worth mentioning C(B, A). C(A, B) = 1 indicates that all solutions in
that the training process of ECSPNet contains two types of B are dominated by at least one solution in A, while
decision variables: ranking and Boolean, which require differ- C(A, B) = 0 implies that no solution in B is dominated
ent operators. Specifically, permutation variables use partially by any solution in A.
matched crossover operators and inversion mutation operators.
Boolean variables use uniform distribution crossover operators D. Comparison of Experimental Parameters
and mutation for binary chromosome operators.

To facilitate comparison with ECSPNet at different scales, In this subsection, we conduct experiments to find an opti-
the following algorithm parameters are set. For the Greedy mal range for β and the size of solution generation. It is crucial
algorithm, we select the same number of generated solutions to determine appropriate hyperparameters in experiments for
as ECSPNet, which is 1000. For NSGA-II, GMOEA, and the model. There are two critical parameters involved in
MOEAD-DQN, three combinations of increasing population the inference experiments. One is the amount of solution
sizes and iteration numbers are selected, which are 100×100, generation, that is, how many solutions are generated, the
300 × 300, and 1000 × 1000 respectively. The running time other one is β. Prob′ represents the probability of choosing
of the three algorithms is comparable to ECSPNet’s when the maximum probability. The larger the value, the better the
the scale is 100 × 100. So by increasing the size of the result, which is equivalent to avoiding the selection with a
comparison algorithm, the optimization ability of ECSPNet lower probability.
can be measured. Fig. 4 shows the comparison data of finding the optimal

Subsequently, the results obtained by the proposed ECSPNet range at four scales. The greater the probability of selecting
and the compared algorithms are compared using the Wilcoxon the maximum probability, that is, the larger the number, the

darker the color of the table. We can see that Prob′ gradually
rank-sum test [50] at a significance level of 0.05. Symbols becomes larger as the number of solutions generated increases.
“+”, “−”, and “≈” indicate the compared algorithm performs When 1000 solutions are generated, the results are stable and
significantly better than, significantly worse than, and statisti- have no obvious growth trend, so 1000 is chosen here for
cally tied to the chosen competitor, respectively. the first parameter. As β ∈ [0, 1) becomes larger, Prob′ first

increases and then stabilizes, or even decreases in some cases,
C. Performance Indicators so the second parameter here β is set to 0.9.

We adopt the following widely used metrics to measure the
convergence and diversity of the Pareto set approximation to E. Experimental Results and Analysis
evaluate the performance of the proposed method. A series of comparison experiments with state-of-the-art

1) Hypervolume (HV) [51]: HV can evaluate both the con- techniques are conducted to analyze and benchmark the per-
vergence and distribution of the obtained solution set formance of the proposed ECSPNet. Next, we will present
without requiring knowledge of the true Pareto front. detailed results and experimental analysis.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



WANG et al.: DRL-BASED ENERGY-CONSCIOUS SCHEDULING UNDER TIME-OF-USE ELECTRICITY PRICE 11499

TABLE III
HV RESULTS OBTAINED BY ECSPNET, GREEDY, NSGA-II, GMOEA, AND MOEA/D-DQN ON ECSP. THE BEST RESULT IN EACH ROW IS BOLDED.

SYMBOLS “+”, “−”, AND “≈” INDICATE THE COMPARED ALGORITHM IS SIGNIFICANTLY BETTER THAN, SIGNIFICANTLY WORSE THAN, AND
STATISTICALLY TIED BY THE BEST, RESPECTIVELY

a concise introduction and analysis of the four sets of experi-
mental results are presented.

1) Table III shows the HV values of three cases we
collected at four scales. The bold value in each row
is the optimal HV value obtained by the five methods
in this case. It can be observed that the results of
ECSPNet outperform the comparison algorithms in all
cases. Furthermore, as the instance size increases, the
HV value of ECSPNet remains virtually unaffected
and stable, highlighting its robust superiority. Table IV
presents the comparison results of ECSPNet using both
the Tchebycheff decomposition and direct weighted
addition methods. The results indicate that the Tcheby-
cheff decomposition method consistently outperforms
the direct weighted addition method in most cases,
with its superiority becoming more pronounced as the
problem scale increases. In addition, we have included

Fig. 4. Comparison results of finding the optimal range. small-scale cases for a more comprehensive comparison,
with the detailed results presented in S.I of the supple-
mentary file.

The statistical results of HV values, C-metric, Pareto front, 2) Table V shows the C-metric results of three cases at each
and solution time obtained by ECSPNet, Greedy, NSGA- scale. The solution set of ECSPNet is called A here,
II, GMOEA, and MOEA/D-DQN are displayed here. Next, and the solution sets of all comparison algorithms are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



11500 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

Fig. 6. Comparison results of solution time.

Fig. 5. Comparison results of the Pareto front at four scales.

It can be seen that ECSPNet has a significant advantage
TABLE IV in solution speed at any scale. The solution speed is

HV RESULTS OBTAINED BY ECSPNET_CHEB AND ECSPNET_SUM. THE relatively rapid at the same scale, and there is almost
BEST RESULT IN EACH ROW IS BOLDED. SYMBOLS “+”, “−”, AND no significant increase in solution time as the test size

“≈” INDICATE THE COMPARED ALGORITHM IS SIGNIFICANTLY
BETTER THAN, SIGNIFICANTLY WORSE THAN, AND STATISTI- increases. As the scale increases, the Greedy algorithm’s

CALLY TIED BY THE BEST, RESPECTIVELY solution time increases rapidly. The results of NSGA-
II, GMOEA, and MOEA/D-DQN are constrained by
the number of populations and iterations. When the
population and the number of iterations are both 100,
the solution time is even within one second, which is
comparable to the solution speed of ECSPNet. It demon-
strates that ECSPNet is not limited by the sizes of the
problems, and can effectively and promptly solve all
scale problems. In addition, both the EC method and
the DW method are used for experiments, although they
prove to be quite time-consuming, even when solving
small-scale cases. Detailed experiments on the solving
speed of the exact method can be found in S.I of the
supplementary file.

Statistical results demonstrate that, for solving the ECSP,
called B. The results indicate that C(A, B) is greater ECSPNet outperforms alternative comparison techniques on
than 0.9, and C(B, A) approaches 0 in most cases. all scales, including in terms of both solution production
Therefore, most of the non-dominated solutions obtained speed and quality. Especially as the scale of the problem
by ECSPNet can dominate the non-dominated solutions continues to grow, the advantages of ECSPNet become more
obtained by other algorithms, that is to say, ECSPNet obvious. However, among the comparative algorithms, the
significantly outperforms other algorithms. performance of NSGA-II, GMOEA, and MOEA/D-DQN is

3) Fig. 5 shows the approximate distribution of non- even worse than the Greedy algorithm, indicating that evo-
dominated solutions at four scales. The Pareto front lutionary algorithms struggle to cope with the huge search
results in the figure clearly show that ECSPNet performs space of ECSP. Furthermore, GMOEA has more complex
better results in test cases of both large and small mechanisms but performs worse than NSGA-II, which is likely
scales, and the effect becomes better as the instance size due to the former’s generative model that is not suitable for
increases, which clearly proves that the convergence and solving ECSP. The performance of MOEA/D-DQN indicates
diversity of ECSPNet are better than other algorithms. that simply selecting a more efficient operator is insufficient to
More detailed experiments results can be found in S.I enable the evolutionary algorithm to solve large-scale ECSP
of the supplementary file. problems.

4) Fig. 6 shows the experimental results of the average
solution time of five methods. In the figure, the three F. Discussion on Practical Applications
parts of NSGA-II, GMOEA, and MOEA/D-DQN are In actual enterprise production, it is quite significant to
100 × 100, 300 × 300, and 1000 × 1000, respectively. consider energy consumption and cost-saving [1], [30]. In this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



WANG et al.: DRL-BASED ENERGY-CONSCIOUS SCHEDULING UNDER TIME-OF-USE ELECTRICITY PRICE 11501

TABLE V
C-METRIC RESULTS BETWEEN ECSPNET(A) AND GREEDY/NSGA-II/GMOEA/MOEA/D-DQN(B) ON ECSP. SYMBOLS “+”, “−”, AND “≈” INDICATE

C(B, A) IS SIGNIFICANTLY BIGGER THAN, SIGNIFICANTLY LESS THAN, AND STATISTICALLY TIED BY C(A, B)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



11502 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

aiming to concurrently optimize both TWT and TEC. Then,
we propose ECSPNet, an efficient DRL-based optimization
method, specifically designed to tackle the ECSP by consid-
ering energy awareness and TOU electricity price. Leveraging
the powerful information interaction and decision-making
capabilities of DRL, ECSPNet proves to be highly efficient
in solving this practical optimization problem. We introduce
the Tchebycheff decomposition method to solve the multi-
objective optimization problem faced by ECSP and use the
policy gradient method to train ECSPNet. Additionally, due
to the use of attention mechanism as the core of the model,
ECSPNet exhibits excellent performance in handling large-
scale problems.

To evaluate ECSPNet’s performance, empirical compar-
isons are conducted on ECSP at both large and small
scales. The results consistently demonstrate the superiority
of ECSPNet over four state-of-the-art algorithms: Greedy,
NSGA-II, GMOEA, and MOEA/D-DQN. ECSPNet simul-
taneously achieves the most efficient, best, and most stable

Fig. 7. Gantt charts of the three cases for ECSP.
results. The solution provided by ECSPNet helps enterprises
ensure work efficiency while significantly saving electricity

paper, the graphitization process of electrode materials is costs as much as possible during scheduling arrangements.
considered as the actual background, then the proposed method This paper demonstrates the great potential of ECSPNet
ECSPNet is used to schedule and optimize the working process in solving the ECSP under TOU electricity price. ECSPNet’s
of the electrodes, and excellent results are obtained. Next, adaptive framework can be extended directly to other schedul-
we analyze and discuss the practical applications from three ing problems, such as vehicle smart charging and electrolytic
aspects of experimental results. aluminum production, by simply modifying the part of the

The Pareto front results for three case scenarios are pre- model that handles task characteristics. However, actual enter-
sented here, as shown in Fig. 7. For each chart, three prises may encounter various uncertainties, such as machine
scheduling Gantt charts are chosen as points of reference. failures, construction delays, insufficient raw materials, and
The red dots represent that the electrode materials work other emergencies. Future work will focus on addressing these
continuously without interruption and avoidance of electricity practical issues that incorporate uncertainty. Furthermore, the
price peaks is not considered during the high energy consump- flexibility and generality of ECSPNet merit further exploration
tion stage. The green dots are the situation after optimizing to extend the application of ECSPNet to other workshop
the solution using the ECSPNet. During the high energy scheduling problems characterized by large decision spaces,
consumption stage, we consider whether to avoid the peak intricate constraints, and dynamic environments.
electricity price. The orange dots indicate that all the high REFERENCES
energy consumption stages avoid the peak electricity price
periods. Based on the above results, the green dot is the [1] X. Li, C. Lu, L. Gao, S. Xiao, and L. Wen, “An effective multiobjective

algorithm for energy-efficient scheduling in a real-life welding shop,”
condition that while production efficiency is improved as much IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 5400–5409, Dec. 2018.
as possible, peak electricity price are avoided and can save [2] F. Zhao, H. Zhang, and L. Wang, “A Pareto-based discrete Jaya
enterprises roughly 30% in electricity costs every year. algorithm for multiobjective carbon-efficient distributed blocking flow

shop scheduling problem,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 8,
In the context of TOU electricity price, when arranging pp. 8588–8599, Aug. 2023.

job production, enterprise schedulers can choose green dots [3] A. Sharma, F. Zhao, and J. W. Sutherland, “Econological scheduling
based on comprehensive trade-offs. That is, while ensuring of a manufacturing enterprise operating under a time-of-use electricity

production efficiency, the electricity costs of workshop work tariff,” J. Cleaner Prod., vol. 108, pp. 256–270, Dec. 2015.
[4] Z. Pei, M. Wan, Z.-Z. Jiang, Z. Wang, and X. Dai, “An approximation

can be reduced to the greatest extent possible. In addition, algorithm for unrelated parallel machine scheduling under TOU electric-
ECSPNet’s adaptive framework can not only be applied in ity tariffs,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 743–756,
the production process of graphite materials but can also Apr. 2021.

[5] W. Shao, Z. Shao, and D. Pi, “An ant colony optimization behavior-based
be directly extended to other types of scheduling problems, MOEA/D for distributed heterogeneous hybrid flow shop scheduling
such as vehicle smart charging and electrolytic aluminum problem under nonidentical time-of-use electricity tariffs,” IEEE Trans.
production, by simply modifying the part of the model that Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 3379–3394, Oct. 2022.

[6] J.-Y. Ding, S. Song, R. Zhang, R. Chiong, and C. Wu, “Parallel
handles task characteristics. machine scheduling under time-of-use electricity prices: New models

and optimization approaches,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 13,
no. 2, pp. 1138–1154, Apr. 2016.

V. CONCLUSION [7] X. Wang, F. Chu, T. Ren, and D. Bai, “Bi-objective optimiza-

In this paper, we first attempt to formulate a new math- tion of a flow shop scheduling problem under time-of-use tariffs,”
IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., early access, Oct. 2, 2024, doi:

ematical model of the ECSP under TOU electricity price, 10.1109/TASE.2024.3468448.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



WANG et al.: DRL-BASED ENERGY-CONSCIOUS SCHEDULING UNDER TIME-OF-USE ELECTRICITY PRICE 11503

[8] K. Fang, N. A. Uhan, F. Zhao, and J. W. Sutherland, “Scheduling on [29] R. Wang, Y. Jing, C. Gu, S. He, and J. Chen, “End-to-end
a single machine under time-of-use electricity tariffs,” Ann. Operations multi-target flexible job shop scheduling with deep reinforcement
Res., vol. 238, nos. 1–2, pp. 199–227, Mar. 2016. learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Oct. 24, 2024, doi:

[9] P. Wu, N. Li, J. Cheng, and C. Chu, “Energy-efficient single-machine 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3485748.
scheduling with release dates under time-of-use electricity tariffs,” [30] C. Lu, L. Gao, J. Yi, and X. Li, “Energy-efficient scheduling of
J. Cleaner Prod., vol. 393, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 136228. distributed flow shop with heterogeneous factories: A real-world case

[10] Z. Tian and L. Zheng, “Single machine parallel-batch scheduling from automobile industry in China,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17,
under time-of-use electricity prices: New formulations and optimisation no. 10, pp. 6687–6696, Oct. 2021.
approaches,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 312, no. 2, pp. 512–524, Jan. 2024. [31] Z. Tian and L. Zheng, “Scheduling unrelated parallel batch processing

[11] M.-J. Park and A. Ham, “Energy-aware flexible job shop scheduling machines under time-of-use electricity prices,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci.
under time-of-use pricing,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 248, Jun. 2022, Eng., early access, Feb. 26, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TASE.2024.3368617.
Art. no. 108507. [32] X. Feng and H. Peng, “Robust identical parallel machine scheduling with

[12] M. H. Ho, F. Hnaien, and F. Dugardin, “Exact method to optimize the two-stage time-of-use tariff and not-all-machine option,” Int. J. Prod.
total electricity cost in two-machine permutation flow shop schedul- Res., vol. 62, nos. 1–2, pp. 380–403, Jan. 2024.
ing problem under time-of-use tariff,” Comput. Oper. Res., vol. 144, [33] J. Ding, S. Dauzère-Pérès, L. Shen, and Z. Lü, “A novel evolutionary
Aug. 2022, Art. no. 105788. algorithm for energy-efficient scheduling in flexible job shops,” IEEE

[13] J. Cheng, F. Chu, M. Liu, P. Wu, and W. Xia, “Bi-criteria single-machine Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1470–1484, Oct. 2023.
batch scheduling with machine on/off switching under time-of-use [34] G. Zhang, S. Yan, X. Song, D. Zhang, and S. Guo, “Evolu-
tariffs,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 112, pp. 721–734, Oct. 2017. tionary algorithm incorporating reinforcement learning for energy-

[14] J.-J. Wang and L. Wang, “A knowledge-based cooperative algorithm for conscious flexible job-shop scheduling problem with transportation
energy-efficient scheduling of distributed flow-shop,” IEEE Trans. Syst., and setup times,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 133, Jul. 2024,
Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1805–1819, May 2020. Art. no. 107974.

[35] W. Song, X. Chen, Q. Li, and Z. Cao, “Flexible job-shop scheduling
[15] L. He, R. Chiong, W. Li, S. Dhakal, Y. Cao, and Y. Zhang, “Mul- via graph neural network and deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans.

tiobjective optimization of energy-efficient job-shop scheduling with Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1600–1610, Feb. 2023.
dynamic reference point-based fuzzy relative entropy,” IEEE Trans. Ind. [36] L. Cheng, Y. Wang, F. Cheng, C. Liu, Z. Zhao, and Y. Wang, “A
Informat., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 600–610, Jan. 2022. deep reinforcement learning-based preemptive approach for cost-aware

[16] L. Chen, L.-L. Cao, Y.-M. Wen, H. Chen, and S.-L. Jiang, “A knowledge- cloud job scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. 9, no. 3,
based NSGA-II algorithm for multi-objective hot rolling production pp. 422–432, May 2024.
scheduling under flexible time-of-use electricity pricing,” J. Manuf. Syst., [37] M. Gaggero, M. Paolucci, and R. Ronco, “Exact and heuristic solution
vol. 69, pp. 255–270, Aug. 2023. approaches for energy-efficient identical parallel machine scheduling

[17] W. Du, W. Fang, C. Liang, Y. Tang, and Y. Jin, “A novel dual-stage with time-of-use costs,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 311, no. 3, pp. 845–866,
evolutionary algorithm for finding robust solutions,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Dec. 2023.
Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3589–3602, Oct. 2024. [38] J. Wang and L. Wang, “A cooperative memetic algorithm with learning-

[18] R. Li, W. Gong, and C. Lu, “A reinforcement learning based RMOEA/D based agent for energy-aware distributed hybrid flow-shop scheduling,”
for bi-objective fuzzy flexible job shop scheduling,” Expert Syst. Appl., IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 461–475, Jun. 2022.
vol. 203, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 117380. [39] W. Du, W. Zhong, Y. Tang, W. Du, and Y. Jin, “High-dimensional robust

[19] F. Q. Zhao, Z. Y. Wang, and L. Wang, “A reinforcement learning driven multi-objective optimization for order scheduling: A decision variable
artificial bee colony algorithm for distributed heterogeneous no-wait classification approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 1,
flowshop scheduling problem with sequence-dependent setup times,” pp. 293–304, Jan. 2019.
IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2305–2320, Oct. 2023. [40] W. Du, Y. Tang, S. Y. S. Leung, L. Tong, A. V. Vasilakos, and F. Qian,

[20] L. Xiong et al., “A two-level energy management strategy for multi- “Robust order scheduling in the discrete manufacturing industry: A mul-
microgrid systems with interval prediction and reinforcement learning,” tiobjective optimization approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14,
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1788–1799, no. 1, pp. 253–264, Jan. 2018.
Apr. 2022. [41] M. H. Ho, F. Hnaien, and F. Dugardin, “Electricity cost minimisation

[21] Z. Pan, L. Wang, C. Dong, and J. Chen, “A knowledge-guided end- for optimal makespan solution in flow shop scheduling under time-
to-end optimization framework based on reinforcement learning for of-use tariffs,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 1041–1067,
flow shop scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, Feb. 2021.
pp. 1853–1861, Feb. 2023. [42] R. Graham, E. Lawler, J. Lenstra, and A. Kan, “Optimization and

[22] B.-G. Kim, Y. Zhang, M. van der Schaar, and J.-W. Lee, “Dynamic approximation in deterministic sequencing and scheduling: A survey,”
pricing and energy consumption scheduling with reinforcement learn- in Discrete Optimization II (Annals of discrete mathematics), vol. 5.
ing,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 2187–2198, Sep. 2016. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1979, pp. 287–326.

[23] F. Zhao, T. Jiang, and L. Wang, “A reinforcement learning driven [43] S. Wang, M. Liu, F. Chu, and C. Chu, “Bi-objective optimiza-
cooperative meta-heuristic algorithm for energy-efficient distributed no- tion of a single machine batch scheduling problem with energy
wait flow-shop scheduling with sequence-dependent setup time,” IEEE cost consideration,” J. Cleaner Prod., vol. 137, pp. 1205–1215,
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 8427–8440, Jul. 2023. Nov. 2016.

[44] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
[24] K. Lei, P. Guo, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Meng, and L. Qian, “Large-scale Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017, pp. 5998–6008.

dynamic scheduling for flexible job-shop with random arrivals of new
jobs by hierarchical reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., [45] W. Zhang, W. Du, W. Du, R. He, and Y. Jin, “Large-scale continuous-
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1007–1018, Jan. 2024. time crude oil scheduling: A variable-length evolutionary optimization

approach,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., early access, Apr. 2, 2024,
[25] R. Li, W. Gong, C. Lu, and L. Wang, “A learning-based memetic doi: 10.1109/TASE.2024.3380744.

algorithm for energy-efficient flexible job-shop scheduling with type- [46] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
2 fuzzy processing time,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 27, no. 3, multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.,
pp. 610–620, Jun. 2023. vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, Apr. 2002.

[26] Z. Pan, L. Wang, J. Wang, and J. Lu, “Deep reinforcement learning [47] C. He, S. Huang, R. Cheng, K. C. Tan, and Y. Jin, “Evolu-
based optimization algorithm for permutation flow-shop scheduling,” tionary multiobjective optimization driven by generative adversarial
IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 983–994, networks (GANs),” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 3129–3142,
Aug. 2023. Jun. 2021.

[27] R. Li, W. Gong, L. Wang, C. Lu, Z. Pan, and X. Zhuang, “Double DQN- [48] Y. Tian, X. Li, H. Ma, X. Zhang, K. C. Tan, and Y. Jin, “Deep
based coevolution for green distributed heterogeneous hybrid flowshop reinforcement learning based adaptive operator selection for evolution-
scheduling with multiple priorities of jobs,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. ary multi-objective optimization,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
Eng., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 6550–6562, Oct. 2024. Intell., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1051–1064, Aug. 2023.

[28] C.-L. Liu, C.-J. Tseng, and P.-H. Weng, “Dynamic job-shop scheduling [49] E. Jazzbin. (2020). Geatpy: The Genetic and Evolutionary Algorithm
via graph attention networks and deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Toolbox With High Performance in Python. [Online]. Available:
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 8662–8672, Jun. 2024. https://github.com/geatpy-dev/geatpy/

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



11504 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025

[50] Z. Wang, H. Hong, K. Ye, G.-E. Zhang, M. Jiang, and K. C. Tan, Wei Du (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
“Manifold interpolation for large-scale multiobjective optimization via and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from
generative adversarial networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., Donghua University, Shanghai, China, in 2009 and
vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 4631–4645, Aug. 2023. 2012, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from The

[51] L. While, P. Hingston, L. Barone, and S. Huband, “A faster algorithm Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong,
for calculating hypervolume,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 10, no. 1, in 2016.
pp. 29–38, Feb. 2006. He is currently an Associate Professor with the

[52] Q. Zhang and H. Li, “MOEA/D: A multiobjective evolutionary algorithm Department of Automation and the Key Laboratory
based on decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 11, no. 6, of Smart Manufacturing in Energy Chemical Pro-
pp. 712–731, Dec. 2007. cess, Ministry of Education, East China University

of Science and Technology, Shanghai. His current
research interests include the theories, methods, and applications of intelligent

Caixia Wang received the B.S. degree in automation optimization, especially evolutionary computation, large-scale optimization,
from Jiangnan University, Jiangsu, China, in 2019, robust optimization, and decision-making of complex industrial processes.
and the M.S. degree in control engineering from the
East China University of Science and Technology,
Shanghai, China, in 2022, where she is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree. Her current research
interests include industrial scheduling optimization
and the application of reinforcement learning.

Wenxuan Fang received the Bachelor of Science
and master’s degrees in automotive engineering from
the East China University of Science and Technol- Yang Tang (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
ogy, Shanghai, China. His research interests include and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
the application of artificial intelligence in industrial Donghua University, Shanghai, China, in 2006 and
settings and industrial scheduling and optimization. 2010, respectively.

From 2008 to 2010, he was a Research Asso-
ciate with The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hong Kong. From 2011 to 2015, he was a Post-
Doctoral Researcher with the Humboldt University
of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, and with Potsdam
Institute for Climate Impact Research, Potsdam,

Xin Dai received the Ph.D. degree from the Germany. He is currently a Professor with the
East China University of Science and Technology, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai. He has pub-
Shanghai, China, in 2023. He is currently a Post- lished more than 200 papers in international journals and conferences,
Doctoral Researcher with the East China University including more than 140 papers in IEEE TRANSACTIONS and 20 arti-
of Science and Technology. His research interests cles in IFAC journals. His current research interests include distributed
include decision optimization of process systems, estimation/control/optimization, computer vision, reinforcement learning,
optimization under uncertainty, and reinforcement cyber-physical systems, hybrid dynamical systems, and their applications.
learning. Prof. Tang was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Fel-

lowship. He is an Senior Area Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS and an Associate Edi-
tor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING

Renchu He SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, IEEE TRANSAC-
received the M.S. degree in con-

TIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON
trol theory and control engineering and the Ph.D. MECHATRONICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I:
degree in chemical equipment and process control REGULAR PAPERS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE AND DEVEL-
from China University of Petroleum, Beijing, in

OPMENTAL SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN
2004 and 2007, respectively. He is currently a Pro- COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, Engineering
fessor with the College of Artificial Intelligence, Applications of Artificial Intelligence journal, Science China Information Sci-
China University of Petroleum, Beijing. His research ences, and Acta Automatica Sinica. He has been awarded as best/outstanding
interests include control theory and its applications, associate editor of IEEE journals for five times. He is a (leading) guest
intelligent modeling, advanced process control, and editor of several special issues focusing on autonomous systems, robotics,
intelligent decision-making. and industrial intelligence in IEEE TRANSACTIONS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universite de Technologie de Troyes. Downloaded on October 02,2025 at 08:17:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.